> **Date Read: 02:17:02 July 7th, 2024** 
> **Status:**  #book #history #orthodox 
> **Topic:**  [[EOC]] [[Protestant]] [[Filioque]] [[Reformation]] [[Reformed Theology]] [[Reformers on Patristic thought]] [[EOC]] [[What do the Orthodox believe?]] [[What is the Orthodox Gospel?]] [[Filioque]] [[Justification]] [[Martin Luther]] [[John Calvin]] [[John MacArthur]] [[Sola Fide]] [[Sola Scriptura]] [[Sola Scriptura or Holy Tradition?]] 


pg171

Why is the filioque such a travesty? Why is it a diabolical and heretical atack upon the Lord God Himself? For many reasons. Chief among these reasons is that it nullifies the unique and personal characteris-rics of the Persons of the Holy Trinity. The unique hypostases of the Fa-the, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit are expressed in Scripture and in the Creed by an affirmation that God is the Father, that Jesus is the Only-Begotten Son of the Father, and that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father. These personal characteristics are the sum of what we know about the Persons of the Holy Trinity, and define each Person's uniqueness. The Father is not the Son, but the Begetter of the Son. The Father is not the Spirit, but the origin from whom the Spirit proceeds.
pg172
What the filoque heresy does is to make whas is unique to the Father, His being the origin and sender of the he Spirit common also with the Son, Jesus Christ. By affirming that he Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, the advocates of the filioque denude the Father of His own unique personal characteristic. This heresy either divides the hypostasis of the Father into two parts, or else the hypostasis of the Son becomes a part of the hypostasis of the Father.
Additionally, we Christians worship One God, We worship One God because there is One Father of us all, and the Father is the origin, source, and monarch of the Holy Trinity, In St. Pauls language, the Father is the head of Christ." By affirming that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, the promoters of the filioque make the Son a co-origin, a co-head of the Holy Spirit, and as such they strip the Father of His sole monarchy in the Trinity. This heresy also makes Jesus something that He is not: it makes Him both the Only-Begotten and the origin of the Holy Spirit. Not only does it attack the Person of the Father and the Son, but it subordinates the Holy Spirit to the Father and the Son by affirming that the Father and Son share in something together (ie. being the co-origins of the Holy Spirit) from which the Spirit is excluded The Father and the Son have a communion therefore, according to this heinous teaching, that the Holy Spirit does not share. What is different about the Holy Spirit from the Father and the Son that something does not proceed from Him?" This again violates the unity of the Godhead, for it posits that the Persons of the Father and Son do not only share a common essence as they do with the Holy Spirit, but also something unique to their Persons that is not shared by the Holy Spirit (ie. being co-origins of the Holy Spirit). As such the Holy Spirit is demoted to a lower rank than the Son, since the Son possesses not only the Fathers nature/essence but also the property of His Person, which the Holy Spirit does not possess, The double procession cannot be reconciled with the



