Tags: [[St. John Chrysostom]] [[Rebekah]] 

Rebekah

In St. John Chrysostom's _Conversations on Marriage,_ when he describes the ideal wife to seek for marriage, the primary example he provides is Rebekah, and he spends multiple pages describing her virtues. He praises her hospitality, chastity, and physical beauty, and he explains why chastity is much more wonderful when combined with outward beauty. He also talks about how rare it is for a woman to have the virtues of both chastity and hospitality at the same time.

He exults in praise of Rebekah, who _"having countless blessings of God on her head, a crown more brilliant than any diadem, was clothed not with golden clothes, but with chastity, piety, hospitality, and all other virtues."_

He greatly praises Rebekah, and he offers her as an example to be imitated by all Orthodox Christians. He says, _"Who, in fact, would not love such a wife, so chaste, so modest, so hospitable, philanthropic and meek, courageous in soul and strong in body? I said this not so that you only hear, or, after listening, only praise, but so that you imitate it. Fathers, imitate the guardianship of the forefather, with which he tried to find an uncorrupted woman, he did not seek wealth, not the nobility of the family, not the beauty of the body and nothing else, but only the nobility of the soul; and mothers, educate your daughters in the same way."_

St. John Chrysostom says that Rebekah was a marvelous wife with great wisdom. He talks about this in detail in his _Conversations on Genesis._ God had told Rebekah that Esau would serve Jacob, and because of her faith in God's Word, it was necessary to deceive her husband when he desired to bless Esau instead of Jacob. According to Chrysostom, God inspired Rebekah with this beautiful intention, and provided her with grace and wisdom to carry the task to completion.

**Chrysostom**: “By faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those who were disobedient, having received the spies, but she directed their departure by another road.” And pay attention to how much wisdom she blended with her prudence. When those sent by the king came and requested the spies, they ask her, “Did men enter in here and come near you?” She answers them, “Yes, they entered in.” First she builds the truth, and then she applies the lie on top. For no lie like this becomes believable unless it first reveals the truth. For this reason all who tell lies probably to be believed, first speak of truths and reveal confessions and later add the lies and things which are questionable. “Spies entered in here and came near you?” “Yes,” she says. If she had said “no” from the beginning, she would have challenged the messengers to investigate. However, “they entered in,” she says, “and they came out and escaped by such and such a road. Pursue them and you will capture them.” **O this good lie! O this good fraud, which does not betray the divine but safeguards the sacred!** When the mouths of saints preach the repentance that made Rahab worthy of such salvation, for example, Joshua the son of Nun, who shouts in the desert, “Let Rahab the prostitute live”; and Paul, who says, “By faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those who were disobedient,” will we not receive salvation even more so when we offer to God our repentance? Homilies on Repentance and Almsgiving 7.5.17.

Rebecca deceiving her husband Jacob…
**Chrysostom**: Notice here, I ask you, along with Rebekah’s affection, her great wisdom as well. Since it was mentioned previously that one was hairy and the other smooth-skinned, she clad him in Esau’s clothing, the text says, and covered his skin, disguising him all over so as to bring off the deception. And after putting the food and bread into Jacob’s hands she had him take it to his father.

Homilies on Genesis 53.6–7
**Chrysostom**: See a mother’s affection, or rather God’s designs: He it was who prompted her to make plans and also made sure all turned out well. Do you see the mother’s excellent planning? See also Jacob’s circumspection in showing his mildness of manner in his reply. “He replied to his mother, ‘My brother Esau is hairy, whereas my skin is smooth. Perhaps my father may touch me, and I will appear ridiculous to him and bring on myself a curse, and not blessing’ ”   Remarkable the child’s dutifulness and his respect for his father: “I am afraid,” he says. “My efforts may have the contrary effect. I may seem out of step with my father’s wishes and win a curse instead of a blessing.” So what does Rebekah do, this extraordinary woman of great affection? Since she was not concocting this only out of her own thinking but was also implementing the prediction from on high, she took every care to banish fear from the child and instill courage so as to bring off the plan…
Homilies on Genesis 53.5